Multi region 2 tier multiregion introduction (#8981)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/concepts/multi-region/dual-region.md

:::caution Before you begin
Before implementing a dual-region setup, review the [limitations](#limitations) and [infrastructure considerations](#infrastructure-and-deployment-platform-considerations) for this configuration.
:::

| Consideration                       | Value                                                         |
| :---------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Recovery time (RTO)**             | ~15 minutes (see [Recovery objectives](#recovery-objectives)) |
| **Data loss (RPO)**                 | 0                                                             |
| **Failover mode**                   | Manual, operator-initiated                                    |
| **Standing second region required** | Yes. Full Orchestration Cluster running in both regions       |

## Architecture

The dual-region setup uses two Kubernetes clusters, each running a complete set of Camunda 8 components.

<img src={DualRegionImg} alt="Camunda dual-region architecture" title="Camunda dual-region architecture" class="img-noborder img-900"/>

- With v2 APIs (default in 8.9+), both regions serve user traffic simultaneously.

> - With v1 APIs, **Region 0** is the primary region serving user traffic; **Region 1** is operational but doesn't serve user traffic under normal conditions.

Reviewer: This is a bit out of context. Users won't understand the difference between the v1 and v2 APIs. Second, with 8.10, the v1 API gets deleted:
* https://github.com/camunda/camunda/issues/49606
* https://github.com/camunda/camunda/issues/49605

Author: This PR will get backported to 8.9, So I'd like to keep it for now.  With 8.10, we will need to remove references to V1 as a separate effort.

|                                       Operate | Active-active with v2 API (active-passive with v1)      | ✅ Required          | Both regions serve users with v2 API      | 0   |
|                                      Tasklist | Active-active with Tasklist V2 (active-passive with v1) | ✅ Required          | Both regions serve users with Tasklist V2 | 0   |
|         <p align="left">**Elasticsearch**</p> | Active-active                                           | ✅ Required          | Data replicated to both                   | 0   |

In a dual-region setup, each Orchestration Cluster component operates as follows:

- **Zeebe** runs across both regions using the [Raft protocol](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)>), distributing partition leaders and followers for continuous replication.
- **Zeebe exporters** push identical data to the Elasticsearch instance in each region. Zeebe's dual export mechanism (not Elasticsearch replication) maintains data consistency. The two Elasticsearch clusters don't communicate directly with each other.

> - **Operate and Tasklist** maintain synchronized data state across both regions via the [Camunda Exporter](/self-managed/components/orchestration-cluster/zeebe/exporters/camunda-exporter.md). See [Active-active and active-passive modes](#active-active-and-active-passive-modes).

Reviewer: This is hard to understand. At the top, it talks about "Camunda Exporters" and in this section about "Zeebe exporters" and "Camunda Exporter". The difference is not clear to users.

Author: fixed

|                                       Operate | Active-active with v2 API (active-passive with v1)      | Embedded in the Orchestration Cluster | <ul><li>Both regions maintain synchronized data state</li><li>Both regions serve users when using v2 API</li><li>**Region-specific data**: Uncompleted batch operations only when using v1 API</li></ul>                                                                             | Data loss possible only when using v1 API, as changes are isolated to the initiated region |
|                                      Tasklist | Active-active with Tasklist V2 (active-passive with v1) | Embedded in the Orchestration Cluster | <ul><li>Both regions maintain synchronized data state</li><li>Both regions serve users when using Tasklist V2</li><li>**Region-specific data**: Task assignments only when using v1 API</li></ul>                                                                                    | Data loss possible only when using v1 API, as changes are isolated to the initiated region |

> |         <p align="left">**Elasticsearch**</p> | Active-active                                           | Both clusters must run                | <ul><li>Independent clusters in each region</li><li>Zeebe exports identical data to both continuously and directly</li><li>Zeebe's dual export mechanism (not Elasticsearch replication) maintains data consistency</li><li>The clusters don't communicate with each other</li></ul> | Zeebe exporters may fail globally if the secondary Elasticsearch cluster is down           |

Reviewer 2: Source supports this: the Camunda Exporter writes identical records to both regional Elasticsearch clusters, so if the secondary ES is unreachable the export position stalls and backpressure becomes cluster-wide — not secondary-only.

Two things: (a) @romansmirnov, does process *execution* halt or only *visibility* lag here? (b) worth one clause clarifying this is exporter backpressure — a different mechanism from the quorum-loss halt described under "Secondary region failure".

Reviewer: This documentation page about the "flow control" explains how the exporter is included in the back pressure: https://docs.camunda.io/docs/next/self-managed/operational-guides/configure-flow-control/

In other words, if one of the exporters is lagging or unavailable, the flow control will throttle to prevent the backlog from growing indefinitely. This results in backpressure that will reject user commands.

I recommend staying in the definitions we already have in the docs:
* https://docs.camunda.io/docs/next/self-managed/components/orchestration-cluster/zeebe/operations/backpressure/
* https://docs.camunda.io/docs/next/self-managed/operational-guides/configure-flow-control/

That said, I would soften the term "halt" as it sounds too sharp.

Author: @leiicamundi, can you suggest a change? This formulation is unchanged from the existing docs. I would suggest a different PR to move this one forward.

> |         <p align="left">**Elasticsearch**</p> | Active-active                                           | Both clusters must run                | <ul><li>Independent clusters in each region</li><li>Zeebe exports identical data to both continuously and directly</li><li>Zeebe's dual export mechanism (not Elasticsearch replication) maintains data consistency</li><li>The clusters don't communicate with each other</li></ul> | Zeebe exporters may fail globally if the secondary Elasticsearch cluster is down           |

Reviewer 2: Terminology is mixed on this page: line 53 uses "Camunda exporters" but this row says "Zeebe exports" / "Zeebe's dual export". Standardize on **Camunda Exporter** (engine class `io.camunda.exporter.CamundaExporter`). Also soften "fail globally" to the actual mechanism — an unreachable secondary ES stalls the exporter position and [flow control](/self-managed/operational-guides/configure-flow-control/) applies backpressure.

```suggestion
| <p align="left">**Elasticsearch**</p> | Active-active | Both clusters must run | <ul><li>Independent clusters in each region</li><li>The Camunda Exporter writes identical data to both continuously and directly</li><li>The Camunda Exporter's dual-write mechanism (not Elasticsearch replication) maintains data consistency</li><li>The clusters don't communicate with each other</li></ul> | If the secondary Elasticsearch cluster is unreachable, the Camunda Exporter position stalls and [flow control](/self-managed/operational-guides/configure-flow-control/) applies backpressure, throttling user commands cluster-wide |
```

- **Active-active**: Both regions serve user traffic simultaneously. All writes flow through the Camunda Exporter, which maintains data consistency regardless of which region handles the request. This is the default with v2 REST API and Tasklist V2 (8.9+).
- **Active-passive**: One region handles all user traffic; the other is operational but doesn't serve user requests. Required for deployments using v1 APIs, because v1 stores some state locally per region (batch operations, task assignments).

In both modes, both regions participate in data processing and replication at all times. "Passive" refers only to the user traffic layer.

:::info Active-active <a id="active-active"></a>

Starting in Camunda 8.8, the **v2 REST API** removed previous region-specific limitations. In current releases, Tasklist also uses only the Orchestration Cluster REST API, so user task operations are no longer tied to the legacy Tasklist V1 behavior. These improvements make a user-facing **active-active** setup possible. Starting with version 8.9, **active-active** routing is the default for dual-region deployments.

:::

## Traffic routing

### Primary and secondary regions

> In v2 API deployments (default in 8.9+), both regions serve user traffic simultaneously and there's no primary/secondary distinction at the UI layer. See [Active-active and active-passive modes](#active-active-and-active-passive-modes).

Reviewer: Does it consider "session management", aka sticky sessions? So, yes, both regions can serve traffic simultaneously. But when a user logs in to Operate and their requests are routed between regions, they may need to log in each time.

Author: Given that Operate and Tasklist persist sessions in Elasticsearch — which is actively replicated across both regions — would users actually need to re-authenticate when traffic is redirected to the secondary region during a failover, or does the shared session store prevent that?

Reviewer: Sessions are not replicated.

Author: I created a ticket to look into it as it is outside of this PR scope, and it needs consideration for more upcoming Dual-region architectures
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-deployment-references/issues/2820

In v1 API deployments, one region is designated as primary and the other as secondary:

- **Primary region**: Serves user traffic (UI access, API calls).
- **Secondary region**: Operational but doesn't serve user traffic under normal conditions.

> In both cases, both regions are operationally active with all components running and replicating data.

Reviewer: Is this still relevant since we remove v1 API with 8.10?

Author: We will backport this to 8.9 as well. We will remove v1 mention for 8.10 separately.

:::

### Installation requirements

To install with the Helm chart, you need two Kubernetes clusters.

:::note Database support
Dual-region configurations don't support OpenSearch or RDBMS (relational database) secondary storage.
:::

#### Network requirements

- Kubernetes clusters, services, and pods must use distinct, non-overlapping CIDRs to avoid routing issues.
- Both regions must be able to communicate with each other (for example, via VPC peering). See the [example AWS EKS implementation](/self-managed/deployment/helm/cloud-providers/amazon/amazon-eks/dual-region.md).
  - Kubernetes services in one cluster must be resolvable and reachable from the other cluster and vice-versa:
    - For AWS EKS, configure DNS chaining. See the [Amazon EKS setup guide](/self-managed/deployment/helm/cloud-providers/amazon/amazon-eks/dual-region.md).
    - For OpenShift, use [Submariner](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_advanced_cluster_management_for_kubernetes/2.11/html/networking/networking#submariner) for multi-cluster networking. See the [OpenShift dual-region setup guide](/self-managed/deployment/helm/cloud-providers/openshift/dual-region.md).

> - Maximum network round trip time (**RTT**) between regions should not exceed **100 ms**.

Reviewer 2: There's no hard-coded RTT limit in the engine — this is a best-practice guideline (RTT directly affects Raft commit latency and throughput). Suggest a few words so it reads as a recommendation rather than an enforced cutoff.

Reviewer 3: Done — reworded as a guideline rather than a hard cutoff: RTT directly affects Raft commit latency and throughput; we recommend keeping it at or below 100 ms, but it is not a hard limit enforced by the engine.

| v1 API user traffic         | Deployments using v1 APIs don't support active-active user traffic routing. All user traffic must be routed to a single primary region. See [Active-active and active-passive modes](#active-active-and-active-passive-modes).                                                                                                                                                       |
| Management Identity support | Management Identity, including multi-tenancy and role-based access control (RBAC), isn't available in this setup. The Orchestration Cluster-level Admin supports multi-tenancy and RBAC instead.                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> | Optimize support            | Not supported (requires Management Identity with specific configuration).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer: Multi Region is targeting the Orchestration Cluster. Why must Optimize be covered? Asked differently, is this really a "Limitation" or by design?

Author: We add this to address feedback that the Optimize story is not visible. Customers/Tam are still not clear about Optimize vs OC, so we over-communicate.

| Connectors deployment       | Connectors can be deployed in a dual-region setup, but you must account for [idempotency](../../../components/connectors/use-connectors/inbound.md#creating-the-connector-event) to avoid event duplication. With two connector deployments running, message idempotency is critical.                                                                                                |

> | Connectors                  | If you run Connectors with an inbound connector deployed in a dual-region setup: <ul><li>To delete a process deployment, do so via Operate, otherwise the inbound connector won't deregister.</li><li>If you have multiple Operate instances running, delete the process in both instances. This is a [known limitation](https://github.com/camunda/camunda/issues/17762).</li></ul> |

Reviewer: Since the Operate v1 API has been deleted, how would a user delete the definition via Operate?

Author: @hisImminence  Could you have a look, please? This is unchanged from 8.9.

Reviewer 4: @sbuettner, quick question for the dual-region docs PR for you. We have a note saying "If you run Connectors with an inbound connector deployed in a dual-region setup: to delete a process deployment, do so via Operate, ..." so the inbound connector deregisters properly. How this works now that the Operate v1 API is gone in 8.10? Does the Operate UI now uses the v2 Orchestration Cluster API for polling deletions and the behavior is unchanged for users? Or did it change? Can you confirm this is correct so we can update the wording to "via the Operate UI" and close the review comment?

Reviewer 4: @theburi I just asked glean and there are a bunch of references in the 8.10 docs that still mention the v1 API. Can you open a follow up issue and assign it to the relevant team to clean the 8.10 docs up as a follow up 🙏 ?

Author: I confirmed removal of v1 references is in [#prj-pdp-2839-remove-operate-and-tasklist-apis](https://camunda.slack.com/archives/C08P3BN5QM7) channle

| Zeebe cluster scaling       | Supported. See [Zeebe cluster configuration](#zeebe-cluster-configuration).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

> | Web Modeler                 | Web Modeler is a standalone component not covered in this guide. Modeling applications can operate independently outside of the Orchestration Clusters. Web Modeler also depends on Management Identity.                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer: Some questions related to Optimize. Why is this a "limitation"? This seems to be by design.

Author: WE added Optimize to clarify some feedback we have gotten and make sure the Optimize limitation is mentioned throughout.
